haemophilus influenzae meningitis with prolonged hospital course. a retrospective evaluation of haemophilus influenzae type b meningitis observed over a 2-year period documented 86 cases. eight of these patients demonstrated an unusual clinical course characterized by persistent fever (duration: greater than 10 days), cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis, profound meningeal enhancement on computed tomography, significant morbidity, and a prolonged hospital course. the mean age of these 8 patients was 6 months, in contrast to a mean age of 14 months for the entire group. two patients had clinical evidence of relapse. four of the 8 patients tested for latex particle agglutination in the cerebrospinal fluid remained positive after 10 days. all patients received antimicrobial therapy until they were afebrile for a minimum of 5 days. subsequent neurologic examination revealed a persistent seizure disorder in 5 patients (62.5%), moderate-to-profound hearing loss in 2 (25%), mild ataxia in 1 (12.5%), and developmental delay with hydrocephalus which required shunting in 1 (12.5%). one patient had no sequelae.
mucosal intussusception to avoid ascending cholangitis. many methods have been devised to prevent ascending cholangitis following kasai's hepatic portoenterostomy for biliary atresia. to investigate the effectiveness of mucosal intussusception in preventing ascending cholangitis, 20 mongrel dogs were randomized to undergo roux-en-y cholecystjejunostomy and common bile duct ligation with or without mucosal intussusception. aeromonas hydrophila was instilled into the gastrointestinal tract. bacterial cultures were grown from samples taken from the gallbladders and lower jejunum, and blood chemistry and barium studies were performed. the barium studies showed satisfactory lack of reflux in all ten dogs with mucosal intussusception. only two of them had positive cultures for aeromonas from the gallbladder 3 days after bacterial instillation into the jejunum. all ten dogs in the control group had positive cultures for aeromonas from the gallbladder. our results showed that the mucosal intussusception group had a significantly lower rate of recovery of organisms from the gallbladder compared with the control group when the organisms were instilled into distal intestine (p less than 0.05). the method is worthy of clinical trial as a means of preventing or treating ascending cholangitis.
gastrointestinal function and structure in hiv-positive patients. we examined 19 patients (17 men) with human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection and gastrointestinal symptoms to determine whether those symptoms were due to either a gastrointestinal tract infection or a defect in mucosal absorption because of an enteropathy. the erythrocyte folate and serum vitamin b12 levels were within normal limits in all of the patients. the serum ferritin level was elevated in 12. the xylose absorption test results were abnormal in 8 of the 13 patients able to complete the study. none of the duodenal aspirates yielded a pathogen. light microscopy revealed nonspecific lymphocytic inflammation without infection in the stomach (in seven patients), the esophagus (in five), the duodenum (in two) and the rectum (in two). however, biopsy specimens were positive for candida albicans in the esophagus (four patients), cytomegalovirus in the esophagus (one) and the rectum (two), helicobacter pylori in the antrum (two), treponema infection in the rectum (two) and mycobacterium avium-intracellulare in the small intestine (one). only three patients had a normal series of biopsy specimens. all of the patients had similar ultrastructural changes at the epithelial-stromal junction of the antral glands and in the intestinal crypts. we conclude that abnormal biochemical and endoscopic findings are common in hiv-positive patients with gastrointestinal symptoms. defects in carbohydrate absorption and ultrastructural changes may be responsible for some aspects of hiv enteropathy.
epidemiology in bone and joint infection. the studies of community-acquired infection indicate the importance of the environment in which the host-pathogen interaction takes place. whereas the high incidence rates at the extremes of life are compatible with a hypothesis of diminished immune competence, the varying rates of acute osteomyelitis during growth, and its predominantly metaphyseal site, suggest that further studies of the molecular biology of this rather specific infection would be revealing. molecular biology has a role, too, in improving understanding of the epidemiology of resistance and pathogenicity in hospital-acquired infections. although antibiotic prescription and other medical practices influence the environment profoundly, we should remember that we may be experiencing long-term trends beyond our present understanding. as more and more reconstructive bone and joint surgery is carried out, careful observational epidemiology remains a vital tool.
the diabetic foot. soft tissue and bone infection. diabetic patients, as a consequence of various neurologic, vascular, and metabolic perturbations, are at high risk for developing infections of the soft tissue and bones of the feet. the microbial etiology of soft tissue in infections is best determined by cultures of a tissue curetting or aspiration, rather than a swab. aerobic gram-positive cocci are the major pathogens in diabetic foot infections; these may be the sole isolate(s) in acute uncomplicated infections, but they are usually accompanied by aerobic gram-negative bacilli or anaerobes in chronic or previously treated infections. carefully selected patients with mild infections can be treated as outpatients with oral antibiotics, but others require hospitalization and broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics. bone infections are frequently diagnosed on the basis of roentgenographs and nuclear medicine scans, but these methods are often inaccurate, and bone cultures should be obtained whenever possible.
infection in total joint replacement. although a small number of infections in total joint replacements are blood borne from distant sources, most infections appear to have been derived at operation. strenuous attempts to reduce this risk by cleaning the air in the wound environment, coupled with prophylactic antibiotics, have reduced infection rates by an order of magnitude in a decade. during that time the potential for exchange arthroplasty in established infection has been shown, and the results are encouraging. rigorous infection control is the key to containing this difficult and expensive problem.
analysis of the immune response to lipopolysaccharide. existence of an interspecies cross-reactive idiotype associated with anti-lipid a antibodies. lps is the major surface glycolipid on gram-negative bacteria. in this work, we have idiotypically characterized the antibody response against lps in different species. to do this, we have produced mab against lps. binding of many of these antibodies to lps could be inhibited by lps and lipid a, indicating that the monoclonals are specific for lipid a, the toxic moiety of the lps molecule. one anti-lipid a antibody, ic9, proved protective against gram-negative bacteremia and endotoxic shock in murine protection models. we generated anti-idiotypic antibodies against ic9. the binding of several of these anti-id to ic9 was specifically inhibited by lipid a. we used these anti-id to characterize the anti-lps response, and the results revealed that the ic9 id is conserved in different species. the importance of an interspecies cross-reactive id in the response to endotoxin and its relevance in vaccine development for septic shock are discussed.
organ hypertrophy and responses of colon microbial populations of growing swine to high dietary protein. thirty-two castrated male crossbred growing pigs (average initial wt 26.9 kg) were used to determine the effect of a high level of dietary protein (37%) compared with a normal level of protein (15%) on enterobacteria and campylobacter sp. inhabitation in the large intestine and on visceral organ hypertrophy and the interrelationships between these two factors. pigs were kept in pairs (eight pens of two pigs/diet) and fed their respective diets and libitum. eight pigs (two pens of two pigs fed each diet) were killed at wk 4, 8, 12 and 16 without fasting. fecal samples were obtained every 2 wk from animals scheduled for necropsy at 16 wk, and colon contents were obtained from all pigs at necropsy; samples were enumerated individually for enterobacteria and campylobacter sp. weights of heart, lungs, liver, kidneys, perirenal fat and empty stomach, small intestine and large intestine were recorded at necropsy. stomach, cecum and proximal colon were sectioned for histopathologic examination. daily body weight gain was depressed by high dietary protein, but liver and kidneys were heavier in the high protein group than in controls at each time interval. mild lymphoid hyperplasia of peyer's patches in the small intestine in some pigs in both groups was indicative of antigenic stimulation but not of pathologic significance. there was no effect of diet on counts of enterobacteria or campylobacter sp. in feces or colon contents during the 16-wk experiment. we conclude that the hypertrophic response of the tissues of growing pigs to high dietary protein is not the result of the presence of campylobacter sp. or enterobacteria in the colon contents.
normalization of plasma arginine vasopressin concentrations when children with meningitis are given maintenance plus replacement fluid therapy  we hypothesized that plasma arginine vasopressin (avp) concentrations in children with meningitis are appropriate for the children's degree of hypovolemia, even though the concentrations were higher than expected for the serum osmolality. a randomized study was conducted to compare the effect on plasma avp concentrations of giving maintenance fluid requirements plus replacement of any deficit versus restricting fluids to two thirds of maintenance requirements for 24 hours. plasma avp concentrations and serum osmolality were measured before fluid therapy was begun and again after 24 hours. nineteen children, 2 months to 17 years of age, were studied; 13 had bacterial meningitis (12 with haemophilus influenzae type b). ten children (seven with bacterial meningitis) received a mean of 1.42 times the calculated maintenance fluid requirements, and nine (six with bacterial meningitis) were restricted to a mean of 0.65 times maintenance. children in the maintenance group also received significantly more sodium (mean = 6.3 meq/kg/24 hr) than children in the fluid-restricted group (mean = 2.0 meq/kg/24 hr). the two groups were comparable for plasma avp concentration and serum osmolality before fluid therapy was begun. the plasma avp concentration was significantly lower after 24 hours of maintenance plus replacement fluids than after fluid restriction (p = 0.005), and the change in avp concentration correlated with the amount of sodium given (p less than 0.02). this study supports the hypothesis that serum avp concentrations are elevated in patients with meningitis because of hypovolemia and become normal when sufficient sodium is given to facilitate reabsorption of water by the proximal tubule of the kidney. patients with meningitis can be given maintenance plus replacement fluids but should be monitored for the development of the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone.
impairment of neutrophil chemotactic and bactericidal function in children infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and partial reversal after in vitro exposure to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. because polymorphonuclear neutrophils are the most important component of host defense against bacteria, we assessed their function in 13 children with asymptomatic and 12 with symptomatic infection with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (hiv-1), and compared their values with healthy adult control values. the functions assessed were (1) chemotaxis, (2) bacterial phagocytosis, (3) superoxide generation, and (4) bactericidal activity. chemotaxis of polymorphonuclear neutrophils toward the chemoattractant n-formylmethionyl leucyl phenylalanine (fmlp) was significantly decreased in symptom-free infected children compared with control subjects (p less than 0.0001), but was increased in children with symptomatic infection (p less than 0.025). bactericidal activity of the neutrophils against staphylococcus aureus was defective in 8 of 12 children with asymptomatic infection (p = 0.016), and in 8 of 9 children with symptomatic infection (p less than 0.00001). superoxide generation by polymorphonuclear neutrophils on stimulation with fmlp and phagocytosis of s. aureus were normal. serum from patients with symptomatic hiv-1 infection was not as efficient in low concentrations as normal serum in the ability to opsonize s. aureus. the in vitro bactericidal defect was partially corrected by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf). the results suggest that both cellular (neutrophils) and humoral defects contribute to the increased incidence of bacterial infections in hiv-1-infected children, and that gm-csf may improve the defective bactericidal activity of polymorphonuclear neutrophils in these patients.
