Harari is an Israeli author, public intellectual,historian and professor in the Department of History at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
[4] Harari is the author of the popular science bestsellers Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind (2014), Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow (2016), and 21 Lessons for the 21st Century (2018).
Harari writings examine free will, consciousness, intelligence, happiness, and suffering.
Harari writes about a "cognitive revolution" that supposedly occurred roughly 70,000 years ago when Homo sapiens supplanted the rival Neanderthals and other species of the genus Homo, developed language skills and structured societies, and ascended as apex predators, aided by the agricultural revolution and accelerated by the scientific revolution, which have allowed humans to approach near mastery over humans environment.
Harari books also examine the possible consequences of a futuristic biotechnological world in which intelligent biological organisms are surpassed by intelligent biological organisms own creations; Harari has said, "Homo sapiens as we know them will disappear in a century or so".
In Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind  Harari surveys human history from the evolutionary emergence of Homo sapiens to 21st-century political and technological revolutions.
Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind is based on Harari lectures to an undergraduate world history class.
Harari was born and raised in Kiryat Ata, Haifa  as one of three children born to Shlomo and Pnina Harari.
Harari family was a secular Jewish family.
Harari father was a state-employed armaments engineer and Harari mother was an office administrator.
Harari taught Harari to read at age three.
Harari studied in a class for intellectually gifted children at the Leo Baeck Education Center in Haifa from the age of eight.
Harari deferred his military service to pursue university studies as part of the Atuda program but was later exempted from completing his military service following Harari studies due to health issues.Harari.
He began studying history and international relations at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem at age 17.
Harari studied at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem from 1993 to 1998, where Harari received a B.A. degree and specialized in medieval history and military history.
Harari completed Harari D.Phil. degree at Jesus College, Oxford  in 2002, under the supervision of Steven J. Gunn.
From 2003 to 2005, Harari pursued postdoctoral studies in history as a Yad Hanadiv Fellow.
While at Oxford  Harari first encountered the writings of Jared Diamond, whom Harari has acknowledged as an influence on Harari own writing.
At a Berggruen Institute salon, Harari said that Diamond's Guns, Germs, and Steel "was kind of an epiphany in Harari academic career.
Harari realized that Harari could actually write such books.".
