Ben was a British-born American economist, professor and investor.
Ben is widely known as the "father of the discipline's , and wrote two of the discipline's founding texts: Security Analysis (1934) with David Dodd  and The Intelligent Investor (1949).
Ben investment philosophy stressed investor psychology, minimal debt, buy-and-hold investing, fundamental analysis, concentrated diversification, buying within the margin of safety, activist investing, and contrarian mindsets.
After graduating from Columbia at age 20, Ben started his career on Wall Street, eventually founding Graham-Newman's.
After employing Buffett  Ben took up teaching positions at Columbia  and later at UCLA Anderson School of Management at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Ben work in managerial economics and investing has led to a modern wave of value investing within mutual funds, hedge funds, diversified holding companies, and other investment vehicles.
Throughout his career  Ben had many notable disciples who went on to receive substantial success in the world of investment, including Irving Kahn and Buffett  Buffett going on to describe Ben as the second most influential person in Ben life after Buffett own father.
Another one of Ben famous students was Sir John Templeton.
Ben was born Benjamin Grossbaum in London, England, to Jewish parents.
On Ben mother's side, Ben was the great-grandson of Rabbi Yaakov Gesundheit and a cousin of neuroscientist Ralph Waldo Gerard.
Ben moved to New York City with The family when Ben was one year old.
The family changed The family name from Grossbaum to Graham in a desire to assimilate into American society and avoid anti-Semitic and anti-German sentiments.
After the death of Ben father, who owned and managed a successful furniture store, The family experienced poverty which Ben said later influenced Ben investing theories by inspiring an early appreciation of buying low-priced bargains.
Ben became a good student, graduating as salutatorian of Ben class at Columbia.
Ben declined an offer to teach English, mathematics, and philosophy, choosing instead to take a job on Wall Street, where Ben eventually started Graham-Newman's.
Early on, Ben made a name for Ben with "The Northern Pipeline Affair", an early case of shareholder activism involving John D. Rockefeller.
Ben research indicated Northern Pipeline held these assets  and bought enough shares to force a proxy vote to distribute these assets to shareholders.
Ben first book, Security Analysis with David Dodd  was published in 1934.
In Security Analysis  Ben proposed a clear definition of investment that was distinguished from what Ben deemed speculation.
Security Analysis read, "An investment operation is one which, upon thorough analysis, promises safety of principal and an adequate return.
Operations not meeting safety of principal and an adequate return are speculative.".
Buffett describes The Intelligent Investor (1949) as "the best book about investing ever written.".
Ben exhorted the stock market participant to first draw a fundamental distinction between investment and speculation.
Ben wrote that the owner of equity stocks should regard equity stocks first and foremost as conferring part ownership of a business.
With regard in mind, the owner of equity stocks should not be too concerned with erratic fluctuations in stock prices, since in the short term the stock market behaves like a voting machine, but in the long term the stock market acts like a weighing machine (i.e. the stock market true value will be reflected in the stock market stock price in the long run).
Ben distinguished between the passive and the active investor.
The passive investor, often referred to as a defensive investor, invests cautiously, looks for value stocks, and buys for the long term.
The active investor, in contrast, is one who has more time, interest, and possibly more specialized knowledge to seek out exceptional buys in the market.
Ben recommended that investors spend time and effort to analyze the financial state of companies.
When a company is available on the market at a price which is at a discount to a company intrinsic value, a "margin of safety" exists, which makes a company suitable for investment.
Ben wrote that investment is most intelligent when investment is most businesslike.
By is Ben meant that the stock investor is neither right nor wrong because others agreed or disagreed with the stock investor  Ben is right because Ben facts and analysis are right.
Ben favorite allegory is that of Mr. Market.
Usually, the price quoted by Mr. Market seems plausible, but occasionally the price quoted by Mr. Market is ridiculous.
The investor is free to either agree with Mr. Market quoted price and trade with Mr. Market  or to ignore Mr. Market completely.
Mr. Market doesn't mind this, and will be back the following day to quote another price.
The point is that the investor should not regard the whims of Mr. Market as determining the value of the shares that the investor owns.
the investor should profit from market folly rather than participate in market folly.
The investor is best off concentrating on the real life performance of The investor companies and receiving dividends, rather than being too concerned with Mr. Market often irrational behavior.
Ben was critical of the corporations of Ben day for obfuscated and irregular financial reporting that made it difficult for investors to discern the true state of the business's finances.
Ben was an advocate of dividend payments to shareholders rather than businesses keeping all of businesses profits as retained earnings.
Ben also criticized those who advised that some types of stocks were a good buy at any price, because of the prospect of sustained stock price growth, without a good analysis of the business's actual financial condition.
These observations remain relevant today.
Ben average investment performance was ~20% annualized return over 1936 to 1956.
The overall market performance for the same time period was 12.2% annually on average.
Despite this, both Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway vice chairman Charlie Munger consider following Ben method strictly to be outdated, with Buffett stating during a 1988 interview with journalist Carol Loomis for Fortune, "Boy, if Buffett had listened only to Ben  would Buffett ever be a lot poorer.".
Ben largest gain was from GEICO.
The position grew to $400 million by 1972, contributing more to the portfolio than all of Graham-Newman's other investments combined.
GEICO was eventually acquired in whole by Berkshire Hathaway in 1996, having previously been saved by Buffett and John J. Byrne in 1976.
