Albert was a German-born theoretical physicist who is widely held to be one of the greatest and most influential scientists of all time.
Best known for developing quantum theory's  Albert also made important contributions to quantum mechanics, and was thus a central figure in the revolutionary reshaping of the scientific understanding of nature that modern physics accomplished in the first decades of the twentieth century.
Albert mass–energy equivalence formula E = mc2, which arises from quantum theory's  has been called "the world's most famous equation".
Albert received the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for Albert services to theoretical physics, and especially for Albert discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect", a pivotal step in the development of quantum theory.
His work is also known for His work influence on the philosophy of science.
In a 1999 poll of 130 leading physicists worldwide by the British journal Physics World, Albert was ranked the greatest physicist of all time.
Albert intellectual achievements and originality have made the word Einstein broadly synonymous with genius.
Albert In 1905, a year sometimes described as Albert annus mirabilis (miracle year), Albert published These.
These outlined a theory of the photoelectric effect, explained Brownian motion, introduced his special theory of relativity—a theory which addressed the inability of classical mechanics to account satisfactorily for the behavior of the electromagnetic field—and demonstrated that if his special theory of relativity—a is correct, mass and energy are equivalent to each other.
In 1915, Albert proposed a general theory of relativity that extended Albert system of mechanics to incorporate gravitation.
A cosmological paper that Albert published the following year laid out the implications of general relativity for the modeling of the structure and evolution of the universe as a whole.
The middle part of Albert career also saw Albert making important contributions to statistical mechanics and quantum theory.
Especially notable was Albert work on the quantum physics of radiation, in which light consists of particles, subsequently called photons.
For much of the last phase of Albert academic life, Albert worked on two endeavors that proved ultimately unsuccessful.
Firstly, Albert fought a long rearguard action against quantum theory's introduction of fundamental randomness into science's picture of the world, objecting that "God does not play dice".
Secondly, Albert attempted to devise a unified field theory by generalizing Albert geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism too.
As a result, Albert became increasingly isolated from the mainstream of modern physics.
Born in the German Empire  Albert moved to Switzerland in 1895, forsaking Albert German citizenship (as a subject of the Kingdom of Württemberg) the following year.
In 1897, at the age of seventeen, Albert enrolled in the mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the Swiss Federal polytechnic school in Zürich, graduating in 1900.
In 1901, Albert acquired Swiss citizenship, which Albert kept for the rest of Albert life.
In 1903, Albert secured a permanent position at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern.
In 1905, Albert submitted a successful PhD dissertation to the University of Zurich.
In 1914, Albert moved to Berlin in order to join the Prussian Academy of Sciences and the Humboldt University of Berlin.
In 1917, Albert became director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics; Albert also became a German citizen again, this time as a subject of the Kingdom of Prussia.
In 1933, while Albert was visiting the US  Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany.
Horrified by the Nazi "war of extermination" against Albert fellow Jews, Albert decided to remain in the US  and was granted American citizenship in 1940.
On the eve of World War II, Albert endorsed a letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt alerting President Franklin D. Roosevelt to the potential German nuclear weapons program and recommending that the US begin similar research.
Albert supported the Allies but generally viewed the idea of nuclear weapons with great dismay.
Albert was born in Ulm, in the Kingdom of Württemberg in the German Empire  on 14 March 1879.
Albert parents, secular Ashkenazi Jews, were Einstein's father.
In 1880, the family moved to Munich, where Einstein's father and his uncle Jakob founded Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein and Cie, a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.
Albert attended a Catholic elementary school in Munich from the age of five.
When Albert was eight, Albert was transferred to the Gymnasium's where Albert received advanced primary and then secondary school education.
In 1894, Hermann and Jakob's company tendered for a contract to install electric lighting in Munich  but without success—they lacked the capital that would have been required to update Hermann and Jakob's company technology from direct current to the more efficient, alternating current alternative.
The failure of Hermann and Jakob's company bid forced Hermann and Jakob's company to sell Hermann and Jakob's company Munich factory and search for new opportunities elsewhere.
The Einstein family moved to Italy  first to Milan and a few months later to Pavia.
Einstein's father.
His father wanted Albert to study electrical engineering, but Albert was a fractious pupil who found the Gymnasium's regimen and teaching methods far from congenial.
Albert later wrote that the Gymnasium's policy of strict rote learning was harmful to creativity.
At the end of December 1894, a letter from a doctor persuaded the Luitpold's authorities to release Albert from the Luitpold's authorities care, and Albert joined The Einstein family in Pavia.
While in Italy as a teenager, Albert wrote an essay entitled "On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic Field".
Albert excelled at physics and mathematics from an early age, and soon acquired the mathematical expertise normally only found in a child several years his senior.
Albert began teaching Albert algebra, calculus and Euclidean geometry when Albert was twelve; Albert made such rapid progress that Albert discovered an original proof of the Pythagorean theorem before Albert thirteenth birthday.
A family tutor, Max Talmud  said that only a short time after A family tutor, Max Talmud had given Albert a geometry textbook  Albert "had worked through a geometry textbook.
Albert thereupon devoted Albert to higher mathematics ...
Soon the flight of Albert mathematical genius was so high A family tutor, Max Talmud could not follow.".
Albert recorded that Albert had "mastered integral and differential calculus" while still just fourteen.
Albert love of algebra and geometry was so great that at twelve, Albert was already confident that nature could be understood as a "mathematical structure".
