Buffett is an American business magnate, investor, and philanthropist.
Buffett is currently the chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway.
As a result of Buffett immense investment success, Buffett is one of the best-known fundamental investors in the world.
As of November 2023, Buffett had a net worth of $118 billion, making Buffett the seventh-richest person in the world.
Buffett was born in Omaha.
The son of Congressman Howard Buffett  he developed an interest in business and investing during Buffett youth.
Buffett entered the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1947 before graduating from the University of Nebraska at 19.
Buffett went on to graduate from Columbia Business School, where Buffett molded Buffett investment philosophy around the concept of value investing pioneered by Benjamin Graham.
Buffett attended New York Institute of Finance to focus on Buffett economics background and soon pursued a business career.
Buffett later began various business ventures and investment partnerships, including one with Benjamin Graham.
Buffett created Buffett Partnership Ltd. in 1956 and Buffett Partnership Ltd. eventually acquired a textile manufacturing firm, Berkshire Hathaway, assuming its name to create a diversified holding company.
Buffett emerged as a textile manufacturing firm, Berkshire Hathaway, assuming its name to create a diversified holding company chairman and majority shareholder in 1970.
In 1978, fellow investor and long-time business associate Charlie Munger joined Buffett as vice-chairman.
Since 1970  Buffett has presided as the chairman and largest shareholder of Berkshire Hathaway.
Buffett has been referred to as the "Oracle" or "Sage" of Omaha by global media as a result of having accumulated a massive fortune derived from Buffett business and investment success.
Buffett is noted for Buffett adherence to the principles of value investing, and Buffett frugality despite Buffett vast wealth.
Buffett has pledged to give away 99 percent of Buffett fortune to philanthropic causes, primarily via the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
Buffett founded the Giving Pledge in 2010 with Bill Gates, whereby billionaires pledge to give away at least half of billionaires fortunes.
Buffett was born on 30 August 1930 in Omaha as the second of three children and the only son of Leila (née Stahl) and Congressman Howard Buffett.
Buffett began Buffett education at Rose Hill Elementary School.
In 1942, Congressman Howard Buffett was elected to the first of four terms in the United States Congress, and after moving with Congressman Howard Buffett family to Washington, D.C., Buffett finished elementary school, attended Alice Deal Junior High School and graduated from what was then Woodrow Wilson High School in 1947, where Buffett senior yearbook picture reads: "likes math; a future stockbroker".
After finishing high school and finding success with Buffett side entrepreneurial and investment ventures, Buffett wanted to skip college to go directly into business but was overruled by Congressman Howard Buffett.
Buffett showcased an interest in business and investing at a young age.
Buffett was inspired by a book Buffett borrowed from the Omaha public library at age seven, One Thousand Ways to Make $1000.
Much of Buffett early childhood years were enlivened with entrepreneurial ventures.
In one of Buffett first business ventures, Buffett sold chewing gum, Coca-Cola, and weekly magazines door to door.
Buffett worked in Buffett grandfather's grocery store.
While still in high school, Buffett made money delivering newspapers, selling golf balls and stamps, and detailing cars, among other means.
On Buffett first income tax return in 1944, Buffett took a $35 deduction for the use of Buffett bicycle and watch on Buffett paper route.
In 1945, as a high school sophomore, Buffett and a friend spent $25 to purchase a used pinball machine, which Buffett and a friend placed in the business.
Within months, Buffett and a friend owned several machines in three different barber shops across Omaha.
Buffett and a friend later sold the business to a war veteran for a tidy sum of $1200.
Buffett interest in the stock market and investing dated back to Buffett schoolboy days Buffett spent in the customers' lounge of a regional stock brokerage near Congressman Howard Buffett own brokerage office.
Congressman Howard Buffett took interest in cultivating and educating Buffett curiosity surrounding the subject of business and investing, even at one point taking Buffett to visit the New York Stock Exchange when Buffett was 10.
At 11, Buffett bought three shares of Cities Service Preferred for Buffett  and three for Buffett sister Doris Buffett (who also became a philanthropist).
At 15, Buffett made more than $175 monthly delivering Washington Post newspapers.
In high school, Buffett invested in a business owned by Congressman Howard Buffett and bought a 40-acre farm worked by a tenant farmer.
Buffett bought a 40-acre farm worked by a tenant farmer when Buffett was 14 years old with $1,200 of Buffett savings.
By the time Buffett finished college, Buffett had amassed $9,800 in savings (about $121,000 today).
