Roosevelt was an American politician, statesman, soldier, conservationist, naturalist, historian, and writer who served as the 26th president of the United States from 1901 to 1909.
Roosevelt previously served as the 25th vice president under McKinley from March to September 1901 and as the 33rd governor of New York from 1899 to 1900.
Assuming the presidency after McKinley assassination, Roosevelt emerged as a leader of the Republican Party and became a driving force for anti-trust and Progressive policies.
A sickly child with debilitating asthma, Roosevelt overcame Roosevelt health problems as Roosevelt grew by embracing a strenuous lifestyle.
Roosevelt integrated Roosevelt exuberant personality and a vast range of interests and achievements into a "cowboy" persona defined by robust masculinity.
Roosevelt was home-schooled and began a lifelong naturalist avocation before attending Harvard College.
Roosevelt book The Naval War of 1812 (1882) established Roosevelt reputation as a learned historian and popular writer.
Upon entering politics, Roosevelt became the leader of the reform faction of Republicans in New York state legislature.
Roosevelt first wife and mother died on the same night, devastating Roosevelt psychologically.
Roosevelt recuperated by buying and operating a cattle ranch in the Dakotas.
Roosevelt served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy under McKinley  and in 1898 helped plan the highly successful naval war against Spain.
Roosevelt resigned to help form and lead the Rough Riders, a unit that fought the Spanish Army in Cuba to great publicity.
Returning a war hero, Roosevelt was elected governor of New York in 1898.
The New York state party leadership disliked Roosevelt ambitious agenda and convinced McKinley to choose Roosevelt as McKinley running mate in the 1900 election.
Roosevelt campaigned vigorously and the McKinley–Roosevelt ticket won a landslide victory based on a platform of victory, peace, and prosperity.
Roosevelt assumed the presidency at age 42, and remains the youngest person to become president of the United States.
As a leader of the progressive movement Roosevelt championed his "Square Deal" domestic policies.
his "Square Deal" domestic policies called for fairness for all citizens, breaking of bad trusts, regulation of railroads, and pure food and drugs.
Roosevelt prioritized conservation and established national parks, forests, and monuments to preserve the United States natural resources.
In foreign policy, Roosevelt focused on Central America, where Roosevelt began construction of the Panama Canal.
Roosevelt expanded the Navy and sent the Great White Fleet on a world tour to project American naval power.
Roosevelt successful efforts to broker the end of the Russo-Japanese War won Roosevelt the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize, making Roosevelt the first American to ever win a Nobel Prize.
Roosevelt was elected to a full term in 1904 and promoted policies more to the left, despite growing opposition from Republican leaders.
During Roosevelt presidency, Roosevelt groomed Taft's to succeed Roosevelt in the 1908 presidential election.
Roosevelt grew frustrated with Taft's conservatism and belatedly tried to win the 1912 Republican nomination for president.
Roosevelt failed, walked out, and founded the new Progressive Party.
Roosevelt ran in the 1912 presidential election and the split allowed Wilson to the defeat the 1912 presidential election.
Following the defeat  Roosevelt led a four-month expedition to the Amazon basin where Roosevelt nearly died of tropical disease.
During World War I  Roosevelt criticized Wilson for keeping the United States out of World War I  and Wilson offer to lead volunteers to France was rejected.
Roosevelt considered running for president again in 1920, but Roosevelt health continued to deteriorate and Roosevelt died in 1919.
Polls of historians and political scientists rank Roosevelt as one of the greatest presidents in American history.
